Split GEP-713 into a Memorandum and separate GEPs for Direct and Inherited Policy (#2813)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api: geps/gep-2648/index.md

Author: Ah, thanks for the reminder, yes, they need to be added to the table of contents file. I'll do that now.

  everything is working - basically, as long as the targeted object exists, and
  the modifications are valid, the metaresource is valid, and this should be
  straightforward to communicate in one or two Conditions. The `status` stanza
  in BackendTLSPolicy is an example of one of the recommended ways to achieve this.
* Direct Policy Attachment SHOULD only be used to target objects in the same
  namespace as the Policy object. Allowing cross-namespace references brings in
  significant security concerns, and/or difficulties about merging cross-namespace
  policy objects. Notably, Mesh use cases may need to do something like this for
  consumer policies, but in general, Policy objects that modify the behavior of
  things outside their own namespace should be avoided unless it uses a handshake
  of some sort, where the things outside the namespace can opt–out of the behavior.
  (Notably, this is the design that we used for ReferenceGrant).

## Apply Policies to Sections of a Resource

The `sectionName` field of `targetRef` can be used to target a specific section of other resources:

* Service.Ports.Name

> * xRoute.Rules.Name

Reviewer: I find this example confusing since xRoute Rules do not have a name field yet. I'm also curious why Gateway.Listeners.Name isn't listed here.

Author: I've added Gateway.Listeners.Name and put a caveat on the Named rules thing. Thanks!

`policies` at the end of the Resource names).
- MAY target a subsection of a resource using the `sectionName` field of the
  `targetRef` struct. If it does, it MUST abide by the rules in this document,
  and MUST clearly indicate the objects that `sectionName` may be used on in its
  documentation.

## Direct Policy Attachment

A Direct Policy Attachment is tightly bound to one instance of a particular
Kind within a single namespace (or to an instance of a single Kind at cluster scope),
and only modifies the behavior of the object that matches its binding.

As an example, the BackendTLSPolicy is specified in GEP-1897, BackendTLSPolicy -
Explicit Backend TLS Connection Configuration. This Policy attaches to the
Service object and tells Gateway API implementations what TLS settings should be
used to connect to that Service when it is used as a backend by a Route.

See GEP-1897 for all the details of this Policy object.

## Direct Policy design guidelines

With this example in mind, here are some guidelines for when to consider
using Direct Policy Attachment:

* The number or scope of objects is exactly _one_ object.

> * The modifications to be made to the objects don’t have any transitive information -

Reviewer 2: I don't think its clear what it means to "only affect the single object". I don't feel like there are any definitions for what the scope of such objects are.

To make things more concrete, what if I apply a BackendTimeoutPolicy to a Gateway. What are the implications here?

Author: If the backend timeouts are set per-backend, then it's an Inherited Policy, because there's no backend config in Gateway.

The intent here is to tightly constrain what a Direct Attached Policy is so that we don't have to boil the ocean of finding a good way to tell everyone whose objects are affected by a policy about that in the status of all the resources.

It's also about ensuring that we don't have "Direct Attached" Policy objects that effectively set defaults, even if the `defaults` stanza isn't used.

Author: I added some more text here.

Reviewer 2: The goals make sense,I am just trying to fully grok the meaning of this since it seems like this is an important aspect 

What does it mean to have a timeout set per-backend?

I can say logically that a timeout seems to apply to a backend in my mental model. And maybe in proxy implementations. But I could have an implementation that has one global value "timeout", and Gateway is the only logical place to put that policy in that implementation. Is that ok, or does that violate this?

What if my data plane implementation does happen to have per-backend config, but I don't want to deal with it so I only support gateway level config - is that ok?

More broadly, what exactly defined what is the scope of impact of an object? Is it the ability to attach a single type to multiple places? Is it the implementation details of how a policy is implemented? Is it a users mental model of how it works?

Reviewer 3: I think this question overlaps with the session persistence GEP @gcs278 has been working on (#2634). In that case we've found that some implementations (Envoy or GRPC-based in particular) can only attach this config at Route level. So even if a user attaches the config at the Backend layer, the underlying implementation is going to be implementing it at the Routing layer. Would that go against this guideline?

Similarly, that GEP currently proposes that Routes will include inline overrides that could override the values specified on a Service. That's not really policy at that point, but it is some config overriding a direct-attached policy which I believe would be a new concept for us. 

To be clear, I actually like the approach that GEP is proposing, I'm just trying to make sure that the corresponding changes we're making here can line up with that so we don't end up with conflicting GEPs.

Author: Good questions, thanks @howardjohn

> I can say logically that a timeout seems to apply to a backend in my mental model. And maybe in proxy implementations. But I could have an implementation that has one global value "timeout", and Gateway is the only logical place to put that policy in that implementation. Is that ok, or does that violate this?

I guess in this case it would be a Direct Attached Policy, yes. It's all about _which resources you need to know about to understand the state of the system_, at the end of the day.
 
> What if my data plane implementation does happen to have per-backend config, but I don't want to deal with it so I only support gateway level config - is that ok?

If you only need to know about the Policy and the Gateway to know everything you need to, then yes.

> More broadly, what exactly defined what is the scope of impact of an object? Is it the ability to attach a single type to multiple places? Is it the implementation details of how a policy is implemented? Is it a users mental model of how it works?

The best way I've found to think of the scope is which objects are _impacted_ by the Policy. That's going to depend on exactly what the Policy actually _does_, and so is going to be Policy-specific.

To use your examples:
- being able to attach a single type to multiple places is almost certainly going to end up as an Inherited Policy, because _probably_, the settings will effectively be defaults or overrides (if they can be attached at different levels). If a Policy can only be attached to sibling objects in a hierarchy (only to Routes, for example), _and_ only affects properties of those sibling objects (so, attaching to Routes can't change backend properties for Service), then it can be a Direct Attached Policy.
- Is the implementation details of how a policy is implemented? In a word, yes. Policy writers will need to be specific about describing what a Policy affects.
- Is it a user's mental model of how it works? Ideally, this model should be pretty similar if not identical to how it's implemented, and the Policy should be able to _clearly indicate_ what objects it is affecting. What "affecting" means depends on the settings defined by the Policy and the implementation.

My personal guideline is "If I'm a user, how will I know if my thing is affected by a Policy?" If there's _any_ level of action-at-a-distance, then the Policy is an Inherited one.

If you have suggestions on better ways to communicate this, happy to change things up more.

Reviewer 3: > If there's any level of action-at-a-distance, then the Policy is an Inherited one.

I think there's probably a category of policies that we know will exclusively be attached at one level and thus would never benefit from defaults and overrides, but would also still have some knock-on effects above or below where they're attached. 

It may be simpler to just say "direct policies can be attached at exactly one layer while inherited policies are used when a policy can be attached at more than one layer with support for defaults and overrides". I think that may still achieve the goal you're aiming for here while also leaving room for these inevitable policies that clearly only fit in one place but could indirectly affect other layers.

Reviewer 2: Do we need take in policies that are additive? They don't make sense to have defaults and overrides, but do target multiple layers. Authorization policies are likely to fall info this category

Reviewer 3: 🤔 that's a good point. Are you referring to policies that essentially just have implicit defaulting behavior all the way down the stack? For example:

policy attached to GW:
```
foo: 1
bar: 2
```

policy attached to Route:
```
bar: 4
baz : 3
```

computed result:
```
foo: 1
bar: 4
baz: 3
```

Reviewer 2: I was thinking:
GatewaY:
```
rules: [a]
```

Route:
```
rules: [b]
```

Result: `rules: [a,b]`

Author: At the end of the day, what I'm trying to do is make it clear that Direct Policies have an easier time with status. If you do _any_ cross object inheritance as mentioned in the previous two comments, those count as inherited, _because you have to solve the Inherited status problem_ to have full status.

"Direct Policies can be attached at exactly one layer" is a good _start_, but if they have knock-on effects further down the hierarchy, then again, _they have the same status problem as Inherited Policies_.

Maybe I just make it more explicit here:
- Direct Policies can be attached at exactly one layer
- Direct Policies can have effects only on the layer they attach to
- Direct Policies can effects only on the object withing the layer that they attach to

This stops the "but my Direct Policy affected another Route attached to the same Gateway when attached to a Route" problem which could arise if we only had the first two items.

Author: Oh, and @howardjohn, additive policies being Inherited is _definitely_ intended, that's one of the things I was worried that the original definition missed. That kind of implicit default still has all the status problems of a more explicit Inherited policy with a defined `defaults` section, so I wanted to make sure that we caught that in the definitions.

# GEP-2648: Direct Policy Attachment

* Issue: [#2648](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/2648)
* Status: Experimental

(See status definitions [here](/geps/overview/#gep-states)

## TLDR

Describe and specify a design pattern for a class of metaresource that can
affect specific settings across a single target object.

> This is a design for a _pattern_, not an API field or new object.

Author: Yeah, this is a great idea. I'll update GEP-713 with something.

## Goals

* Specify what common properties all Direct Attached Policies MUST have
* Recommend design patterns for areas that cannot be mandated but that could
  cause problems for API designers.

## Non-Goals

* Fully specify the entire design space for Direct Policy Attachment

## Introduction

GEP-713 defines two classes of Policy Attachment: Direct and Inherited.

Direct Attached Policies (or Direct Policies) _only_ affect the object they are
attached to; that is, the object specified in their `targetRef`.

> Note that as soon as the Policy affects more objects than the referenced object,

Reviewer 4: I mentioned this in a review of the gep-713 changes, but again, shouldn't a Direct Policy be able to refer to a collection/set of objects, as long as they are all at the same hierarchical level?  E.g. a targetRef of a set of common rules or specific routes; or a struct that groups non-hierarchical objects from the same namespace.

Author: Originally, I thought no, as it will add another layer of complexity onto the status design (each targetRef will probably need a new status...) But I think I could be talked around on this - but I think that this dicussion needs to happen _after_ this PR merges - this has already been in progress for way too long.

it is an Inherited Policy.

## Direct Policy Attachment requirements in brief

The following parts of GEP-713 also apply here. Direct Policy Attachments:

- MUST be their own CRDs (e.g. `TimeoutPolicy`, `RetryPolicy` etc),
- MUST include both `spec` and `status` stanzas
- MUST have the `status` stanza include a `conditions` section using the standard
  upstream Condition type
- MUST use the `targetRef` struct to specify their target resource.
- MUST follow the naming requirements (MUST be named to clearly indicate that the
kind is a Policy, and SHOULD use the `Policy` suffix at the end of the Kind and
`policies` at the end of the Resource names).
- MAY target a subsection of a resource using the `sectionName` field of the
  `targetRef` struct. If it does, it MUST abide by the rules in this document,
  and MUST clearly indicate the objects that `sectionName` may be used on in its
  documentation.

## Direct Policy Attachment

A Direct Policy Attachment is tightly bound to one instance of a particular
Kind within a single namespace (or to an instance of a single Kind at cluster scope),
and only modifies the behavior of the object that matches its binding.

> As an example, the BackendTLSPolicy is specified in GEP-1897, BackendTLSPolicy -

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As an example, the BackendTLSPolicy is specified in [GEP-1897](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-1897/), BackendTLSPolicy -
```

Explicit Backend TLS Connection Configuration. This Policy attaches to the
Service object and tells Gateway API implementations what TLS settings should be
used to connect to that Service when it is used as a backend by a Route.

See GEP-1897 for all the details of this Policy object.

## Direct Policy design rules

With this example in mind, here are some rules for when a Policy is a Direct
Policy:

* The number or scope of objects is exactly _one_ object. No label selectors or
  lists of `targetRef` are allowed.
* The modifications to be made to the objects don’t have any transitive information -
  that is, the modifications MUST only affect the single object that the targeted
  metaresource is bound to, and MUST NOT have ramifications that flow beyond that
  object. No attaching a Policy to a Gateway and affecting settings in Routes or
  backends. If a Direct Attached Policy attaches to an object, it can only affect
  properties _of that object_.
* In terms of status, it SHOULD be reasonably easy for a user to understand that

>   everything is working - basically, as long as the targeted object exists, and
>   the modifications are valid, the metaresource is valid, and this should be
>   straightforward to communicate in one or two Conditions. The `status` stanza

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  everything is working - basically, as long as the targeted object exists, 
  the modifications are valid, the metaresource is valid, and the status is clearly expressed in one or two Conditions.  The `status` stanza
```

  in BackendTLSPolicy is an example of one of the recommended ways to achieve this.
* Direct Policy Attachment SHOULD only be used to target objects in the same
  namespace as the Policy object. Allowing cross-namespace references brings in
  significant security concerns, and/or difficulties about merging cross-namespace
  policy objects. Notably, Mesh use cases may need to do something like this for
  consumer policies, but in general, Policy objects that modify the behavior of
  things outside their own namespace should be avoided unless it uses a handshake
  of some sort, where the things outside the namespace can opt–out of the behavior.
  (Notably, this is the design that we used for ReferenceGrant).

## Apply Policies to Sections of a Resource

> The `sectionName` field of `targetRef` can be used to target a specific section of other resources:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `sectionName` field of `targetRef` can be used to target a specific section of other resources, for example:
```

* Service.Ports.Name

> * Gateway.Listners.Name

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Gateway.Listeners.Name
```

* HTTPRoute.Rules.Name (once they are added in GEP-995, PR at https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/2593)

For example, the RetryPolicy below applies to a RouteRule inside an HTTPRoute.
(or rather, it will when GEP-995 merges).

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: http-app-1
  labels:
    app: foo
spec:
  hostnames:
  - "foo.com"
  rules:

>   - name: bar

Reviewer 4: This is the sectionName, but I believe the same name can be used in different stanzas that are different objects, which breaks the application of policy to section name.  For example, couldn't I have a rule and a backendRef with the same name?

Author: At the present, this is left to the Policy creator to define. I think this is another good follow-up discussion though.

Reviewer 5: The example provided assumes GEP-995 (https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/2593), I understand.

Reviewer 6: > For example, couldn't I have a rule and a backendRef with the same name?

Hrm, I've definitely never considered this - since the backendRef is itself an object so I've only ever thought of targeting it directly with an policy targetRef to the kind/namespace/name of the ref'd object rather than scoping the targeting to only via it's backend role within a specific HTTPRoute rule.

> I believe the same name can be used in different stanzas that are different objects

For backendRefs yea, you could have two rules targeting the same named backendRef, which I think makes the backendRef name inappropriate as a standalone selector - scoping it _under_ an HTTPRoute rule sectionName (which I believe https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/2593 suggests making unique when specified) I think would allow precise targeting though, like

```
apiVersion: networking.acme.io/v1alpha2
kind: RetryPolicy
metadata:
  name: foo
spec:
  targetRef:
    group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: HTTPRoute
    name: http-app-1
    sectionName: bar
  maxRetries: 5
  backendRefs:
  - "baz"
```

Reviewer 5: +1 to not using `sectionName` for `backendRef`, and to "section of a HTTPRoute" == a HTTPRouteRule.

Reviewer 6: FWIW the need for "multi-dimensional targeting" isn't unique to BackendTLSPolicy - I hope that expecting all Gateways supporting BackendTLSPolicy to respect a policy applied to a Service for any backendRefs targeting it can be sufficient to start with, but scoping a policy to more limited `from` clauses is also a pattern we'll need to figure out if we want to have AuthorizationPolicy for mesh too (e.g. apply policy to targetRef `destination` and scope ALLOW rules as `from` potentially multiple `origin` sources, similar to the structure of https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/security/authorization-policy/).

Reviewer 4: @robscott 

> I think sectionName would be used exclusively to refer to rule names, and that rule names would need to be unique within a Route when they were specified. 

Ok, I wasn't aware that we had clearly defined `sectionNames` for `HTTPRoute` or any other object.  Where do we document that information and more importantly, how is the constraint enforced?

Reviewer 6: Opened https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/2946 to improve documentation for `SectionName`

    matches:
    - path:
        type: Prefix
        value: /bar
    backendRefs:
    - name: my-service1
      port: 8080
---
apiVersion: networking.acme.io/v1alpha2
kind: RetryPolicy
metadata:
  name: foo
spec:
  maxRetries: 5
  targetRef:
    name: http-app-1
    group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: HTTPRoute
    sectionName: bar
```

If a `sectionName` is specified, but does not exist on the targeted object, the
Policy must fail to attach, and the policy implementation should record a

> `resolvedRefs` or similar Condition in the Policy's status.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`resolvedRefs` failure or similar Condition in the Policy's status.
```

> 

Reviewer 4: Could you add a brief description of what happens when more than one object matches the sectionName in the targetRef?

Reviewer 6: I don't think this should be possible/allowed - I believe `targetRef` is only intended to select a single object as defined by a unique group/kind/namespace/name/sectionName.

I think https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/2813#discussion_r1552455260 may propose a possible path forward for your use case though?

When multiple Policies of the same type target the same object, one with a
`sectionName` and one without, the more specific policy (i.e., the one with a
`sectionName`) will have its entire `spec` applied to the named section.
The less specific policy will also have its `spec` applied to the target but
MUST not affect the named section. The less specific policy will have its `spec`
applied to all other sections of the target that are not targeted by any other
more specific policies.

## User discoverability and status

### Standard label on CRD objects

Each CRD that defines a Direct Policy object MUST include a label that specifies that
it is a Policy object, and that label MUST specify that the object is a `direct`
one.

> The label is `gateway.networking.k8s.io/policy: direct`.

Reviewer 4: If we have this label, why would we still need to follow a rule that place the suffix "Policy" on the name of the CRD?

Author: For ease of use of humans, only.

This solution is intended to allow both users and tooling to identify which CRDs
in the cluster should be treated as Policy objects, and so is intended to help
with discoverability generally. It will also be used by the forthcoming `kubectl`
plugin.

### Conditions

Implementations using Policy objects MUST include a `spec` and `status` stanza,
and the `status` stanza MUST contain a `conditions` stanza, using the standard
Condition format.

Policy authors should consider namespacing the `conditions` stanza with a
`controllerName`, as in Route status, if more than one implementation will be
reconciling the Policy type.

#### On `Policy` objects

Each Direct Attached Policy MUST populate the `Accepted` condition and reasons

> as defined in the Go spec, a snapshot of which is included below. The canonical

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
as defined in the PolicyTypes API, a snapshot of which is included below. The canonical
```

  // by a targeted resource, and why.
  //
  // Possible reasons for this condition to be True are:
  //
  // * "Accepted"
  //
  // Possible reasons for this condition to be False are:
  //
  // * "Conflicted"
  // * "Invalid"
  // * "TargetNotFound"
  //
  PolicyConditionAccepted PolicyConditionType = "Accepted"

  // PolicyReasonAccepted is used with the "Accepted" condition when the policy has been
  // accepted by the targeted resource.
  PolicyReasonAccepted PolicyConditionReason = "Accepted"

  // PolicyReasonConflicted is used with the "Accepted" condition when the policy has not
  // been accepted by a targeted resource because there is another policy that targets the same
  // resource and a merge is not possible.
  PolicyReasonConflicted PolicyConditionReason = "Conflicted"

  // PolicyReasonInvalid is used with the "Accepted" condition when the policy is syntactically
  // or semantically invalid.
  PolicyReasonInvalid PolicyConditionReason = "Invalid"

  // PolicyReasonTargetNotFound is used with the "Accepted" condition when the policy is attached to
  // an invalid target resource
  PolicyReasonTargetNotFound PolicyConditionReason = "TargetNotFound"
)
```

> #### On targeted resources

Reviewer 4: There isn't a section on this in gep-2649.  Is it not possible or not recommended?

Author: I didn't explicitly specify it because it's similar to everything else, I will add it.

Implementations that use Direct Policy objects SHOULD put a Condition into
`status.Conditions` of any objects affected by a Direct Policy, if that field
is present.

If they do, that Condition MUST have a `type` ending in `PolicyAffected` (like
`gateway.networking.k8s.io/PolicyAffected`),
and have the optional `observedGeneration` field kept up to date when the `spec`

> of the Policy-attached object changes.

Reviewer 3: How does this work for implementations like Kuadrant that are implementing policies alongside of the primary implementations of these APIs? I think the intent here is that in the case of a Gateway for example, only the controller implementing that Gateway directly should populate this status?

Reviewer 5: Kuadrant uses `kuadrant.io/DNSPolicyAffected` or `kuadrant.io/TLSPolicyAffected` (depending on the kind of policy), to set the condition on the Gateway object. It also keeps the `observedGeneration` field up to date.

To avoid arm wrestling against the primary gateway controller:
1. it's always additive, relying on [`meta.SetStatusCondition`](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/api/meta#SetStatusCondition) and [`meta.RemoveStatusCondition`](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/api/meta#RemoveStatusCondition) - i.e. it tries not to touch on the other conditions;
2. in case of race condition detected and therefore the API server failing to update due to the state of the object changed, it requeues to try again later clean.

Author: Thanks @guicassolato, that's exactly what I intended with this, to not block multiple controllers from being able to say "hey, this object is affected by some policy, you should look into that".

Author: I added some text above to make this clearer.

Implementations SHOULD use their own unique domain prefix for this Condition
`type` - it is recommended that implementations use the same domain as in the
`controllerName` field on GatewayClass (or some other implementation-unique

> domain for implementations that do not use GatewayClass).

Reviewer 3: If we had multiple controllers populating the same conditions list, wouldn't we risk a loop where each controller was trying to populate the "correct" set of conditions?

Reviewer 5: I can imagine maybe an API or protocol that the primary gateway controller would commit to, and thus take responsibility for all updates. That not being the case, we may depend on the multiple controllers just to be good citizens, I guess. But I could be oversimplifying. Not sure if this would still hold for – say, let's exaggerate – dozens of controllers. At the very least, it can get a bit noisy.

Author: As @guicassolato said on another comment, the way this is _supposed_ to work is that controllers are supposed to update Conditions lists _additively_, putting back any Condition they don't understand or update as they found it. And because Conditions are a listTypeMap, the ordering shouldn't matter as far as the apiserver is concerned (I think, would need to check with apimachinery if that's actually the case).

Reviewer 3: Interesting - that feels like something we should drop into implementation guidelines so we avoid unfortunate surprises. 

I know we put a lot of thought into using `controllerName` in our nested conditions on Routes and Policies, are we saying that in those cases an implementation like Kuadrant would create a separate `RouteParentStatus` entry with their controller name, even if they're not the ones directly implementing the parent? I think that idea generally makes sense to me, but it gets more confusing when you have resources that we historically thought of as having status that was owned by a single controller.

Author: I'll make a note to do an update to the implemntation guidelines later about this.

Reviewer 3: > controllers are supposed to update Conditions lists additively, putting back any Condition they don't understand or update as they found it

This seems to require a controller to be aware of any condition it may have theoretically set in the past instead of assuming full ownership of the conditions and replacing with the current set of conditions it knows about. I generally would prefer some form of namespacing/nesting in status as broadly as possible that allows each controller to clearly own separate lists. This PR doesn't need to solve this, but it would be nice to have some kind of note somewhere in the GEP covering this as a follow up area and/or unresolved.

Author: It's actually part of the contract of upstream Conditions that controllers don't touch Conditions they don't know about - precisely to solve this sort of case. I agree that namespacing or nesting is better, but we can't always rely on that, especially if you're affecting some Core object that doesn't have a namespaced Conditions list.

For objects that do _not_ have a `status.Conditions` field available (`Secret`

> is a good example), that object SHOULD instead have an annotation of

Reviewer 4: I hope!
```suggestion
is a good example), that object SHOULD instead have a label specifiying
```

`gateway.networking.k8s.io/PolicyAffected: true` (or with an
implementation-specific domain prefix) added instead.

> Because these Conditions or annotations are namespaced per-implementation,

Reviewer 4: Annotation or label?

Author: I've updated to label, although I originally chose annotation because these are machine-generated and machine-added. I updated because it seems useful to be able to search objects to find policy affected ones (which you can't do with annotations).

implementations SHOULD:

- Add the Condition or annotation if an object is policy affected when it is not
  already present
- Remove the Condition or annotation when the last policy object stops referencing
  the targeted object.

### Other Status designs

This section contains other recommendations for status designs. Note that this
is a SHOULD rather than a MUST, as this design is still not final.

#### Standard status struct

> Status: Experimental

Reviewer 3: Why does this need a separate status?

Author: This is an attempt to codify what we're doing in BackendTLSPolicy into this GEP, that's all.

This design is not final and we invite feedback on any use of it in implementations.

Policy objects SHOULD use the upstream `PolicyAncestorStatus` struct in their
respective Status structs. Please see the included `PolicyAncestorStatus` struct,
and its use in the `BackendTLSPolicy` object for detailed examples. Included here
is a representative version.

This pattern enables different conditions to be set for different "Ancestors"
of the target resource. This is particularly helpful for policies that may be
implemented by multiple controllers or attached to resources with different

> capabilities. This pattern also provides a clear view of what resources a

Reviewer: What does "capabilities" mean here? Can you include an example?

Author: Clarified and added.

	// manages the parent and the ancestors MUST add an entry to this list when
	// the controller first sees the route and SHOULD update the entry as
	// appropriate when the relevant ancestor is modified.
	//
	// Note that choosing the relevant ancestor is left to the Policy designers;
	// an important part of Policy design is designing the right object level at
	// which to namespace this status.
	//
	// Note also that implementations MUST ONLY populate ancestor status for 
	// the Ancestor resources they are responsible for. Implementations MUST
	// use the ControllerName field to uniquely identify the entries in this list
	// that they are responsible for.
	//
	// A maximum of 32 ancestors will be represented in this list. An empty list
	// means the Policy is not relevant for any ancestors.
	//
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=32
	Ancestors []PolicyAncestorStatus `json:"ancestors"`
}
```

## Examples

### Hypothetical TLSMinimumVersionPolicy

The following hypothetical Policy sets the minimum TLS version required on a
Gateway Listener:

```yaml
apiVersion: networking.example.io/v1alpha1
kind: TLSMinimumVersionPolicy
metadata:
  name: minimum12

>   namespace: appns

Reviewer 4: Is this missing the label?
```suggestion
  namespace: appns
  label: `gateway.networking.k8s.io/policy:direct'
```

Author: Yes, it's from an earlier version that didn't have the requirement, thanks.

        type: Prefix
        value: /bar
    backendRefs:
    - name: my-service1
      port: 8080
---
apiVersion: networking.acme.io/v1alpha2
kind: RetryPolicy
metadata:
  name: foo
spec:
  maxRetries: 5
  targetRef:
    name: http-app-1
    group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: HTTPRoute
    sectionName: bar
```

If a `sectionName` is specified, but does not exist on the targeted object, the
Policy must fail to attach, and the policy implementation should record a
`resolvedRefs` failure or similar Condition in the Policy's status.

When multiple Policies of the same type target the same object, one with a
`sectionName` and one without, the more specific policy (i.e., the one with a
`sectionName`) will have its entire `spec` applied to the named section.
The less specific policy will also have its `spec` applied to the target but
MUST not affect the named section. The less specific policy will have its `spec`
applied to all other sections of the target that are not targeted by any other
more specific policies.

When more than one object matches the same object _and_ `sectionName`, the usual
conflict-resolution rules (as defined in GEP-713 should be used). These boil down

> to "oldest by creation date wins".

Reviewer 6: @candita I don't think this clarification actually solves for your use case, where you're explicitly trying to match multiple objects with a given backendRef `name`.

Refs https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/2813#discussion_r1520616890 and https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/2813#discussion_r1552455260

Author: I added a "SHOULD NOT use `backendRef`" above, which should clear this up, I think.

Reviewer 4: @mikemorris I wanted information on what was considered a `SectionName` in the object.  I [heard from Rob that we have known `SectionNames` for each object.](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/2813#discussion_r1554111330)  I do hope we have this documented somewhere.

Reviewer 6: Opened https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/2946 to improve documentation for SectionName
